ansible-test - Improve container management. (#78550)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/dev_guide/testing_running_locally.rst

.. _testing_running_locally:

*******************************
Testing Ansible and Collections
*******************************

This document describes how to run tests using ``ansible-test``.

.. contents::
   :local:

Setup
=====

To run ``ansible-test``, you need to make sure your environment is properly setup.

> .. warning::

Reviewer: Can you add a link for how to set up the environment properly here?

Author: Are you referring to the "you need to make sure your environment is properly setup" statement two lines up? If so, that sentence was supposed to introduce this section, with the setup instructions being the two following subsections for Testing an Ansible Collection and Testing ansible-core. It seems I need to reword it though. Do you have any suggestions?

   If you use ``git`` for version control, make sure the files you are working with are not ignored by ``git``.
   If they are, ``ansible-test`` will ignore them as well.

Testing an Ansible Collection
-----------------------------

> If you're testing an Ansible Collection, you'll need a copy of the collection, preferably a git clone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are testing an Ansible Collection, you need a copy of the collection, preferably a git clone.
```

As with Ansible itself, ``ansible-test`` requires collections to be within a valid collection root.

> 

Reviewer: collection root sounds like a new term (to me anyway). Is this just that they all have to be in the same /ansible_collections/ folder somewhere?

Reviewer: So I see two options for the stuff below this:
- Add a section above it that just lists the steps, something like:
     1. Clone the collection you want to test into a valid collection root (must include /ansible_collection/<collection namespace>/<collection name>).
     2. Clone any dependent collections. (See the collection ``galaxy.yml`` for a list of possible dependencies).
     3. Run ``ansible-test`` commands from the newly cloned collection directory.

- Or - Turn the sentences below into these steps, and keep the codeblocks below each 'step'.   This is the option I prefer but either option would work I think.

Author: > collection root sounds like a new term (to me anyway). Is this just that they all have to be in the same /ansible_collections/ folder somewhere?

It's an infrequently used term, mostly found in code comments and a few messages produced by ansible-test. Yes, it means all the collections must be in the same `ansible_collections` directory. Use of the configured `COLLECTIONS_PATHS` list of collection root paths is not supported.

For example, if you want to work with the ``community.windows`` collection, you could clone it from GitHub:

.. code-block:: shell-session

   git clone https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.windows ~/dev/ansible_collections/community/windows

Since it depends on the ``ansible.windows`` collection you need to clone that as well:

.. code-block:: shell-session

   git clone https://github.com/ansible-collections/ansible.windows ~/dev/ansible_collections/ansible/windows

Finally, you can switch to the directory where the ``community.windows`` collection resides:

.. code-block:: shell-session

   cd ~/dev/ansible_collections/community/windows

Now you're ready to start testing the collection with ``ansible-test`` commands.

.. note::

   If your collection has any dependencies on other collections, they must be in the same collection root.
   Unlike Ansible, ``ansible-test`` will not use your configured collection roots (or other Ansible configuration).

> Testing Ansible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testing ``ansible-core``
```

> ---------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
------------------------------------
```

> If you're testing Ansible itself, you'll need a copy of the Ansible source code, preferably a git clone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're testing ``ansible-core`` itself, you'll need a copy of the ``ansible-core`` source code, preferably a git clone.
```

> Having an installed copy of Ansible is not sufficient, or required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having an installed copy of ``ansible-core`` is not sufficient or required.
```

.. note::

>    If you do have an installed version of Ansible,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you do have an installed version of ``ansible-core`` or Ansible,
```

>    make sure you are not using that copy of ``ansible-test`` to test Ansible itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   make sure you are not using that copy of ``ansible-test`` to test ``ansible-core`` itself.
```

Reviewer: is there some easy way they can verify they are using the ``ansible-test`` from their clone and not some prior install?

To use another container, specify it immediately after the ``--docker`` option.

.. note::

   The ``default`` container is recommended for all sanity and unit tests.

To see the list of supported containers, use the ``--help`` option with the ``ansible-test`` command you want to use.

.. note::

   The list of available containers is dependent on the ``ansible-test`` command you are using.

You can also specify your own container.
When doing so, you will need to indicate the Python version in the container with the ``--python`` option.

Custom containers
"""""""""""""""""

When building custom containers, keep in mind the following requirements:

* The ``USER`` should be ``root``
* Use an ``init`` process, such as ``systemd``
* Include ``sshd`` and accept connections on the default port of ``22``
* Include a POSIX compatible ``sh`` shell which can be found on ``PATH``
* Include a ``sleep`` utility which runs as a subprocess
* Include a supported version of Python
* Avoid using the ``VOLUME`` statement

  * Mounts under ``/sys/fs/cgroup`` may prevent ``systemd`` in containers from running
  * Anonymous volumes may be leaked when running containers

> 

Reviewer: There is an indent on the last two items above which will make them look like sub bullets to the 'Avoid using the VOLUME statement". Is that your intention?

Author: Yes, I was attempting to explain why the volume mounts are a problem.

Docker and SELinux
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Using Docker on a host with SELinux may require setting the system in permissive mode.
Consider using Podman instead.

Docker Desktop with WSL2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These instructions explain how to use ``ansible-test`` with WSL2 and Docker Desktop *without* systemd support.

.. note::

   If your WSL2 environment includes systemd support, these steps are not required.

Configuration requirements
""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Open Docker Desktop and go to the Settings screen, then verify these Settings on the General tab:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open Docker Desktop and go to the **Settings **.screen, then verify these Settings on the **General** tab:
```

> * Use the WSL 2 based engine - checked

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Use the WSL 2 based engine - checked
```

> * Start Docker Desktop when you log in - unchecked

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Start Docker Desktop when you log in - unchecked
```

> Next go to the Resources tab and check the WSL Integration section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select the **Resources** tab and check the **WSL Integration** section.
```

> * Under "Enable integration with additional distros" make sure each distro you want to use is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Under **Enable integration with additional distros**, make sure each distro you want to use is enabled.
```

> * Click "Apply and restart" if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Click **Apply and restart** if needed.
```

Reviewer: trying to get a little fancy w/ the formatting and turn these into steps. people love steps :-)

Setup instructions
""""""""""""""""""

.. note::

   If all WSL instances have been stopped, these changes will need to be re-applied.

> 1. Verify Docker Desktop is properly configured (see Configuration Requirements above)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Verify Docker Desktop is properly configured (see Configuration Requirements above).
```

> 2. Quit Docker Desktop if it is running (Docker Desktop taskbar icon | Quit Docker Desktop)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Quit Docker Desktop if it is running (Click **Docker Desktop** taskbar icon and select **Quit Docker Desktop**).
```

> 3. Stop any running WSL instances with ``wsl --shutdown``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Stop any running WSL instances with ``wsl --shutdown``.
```

> 4. Verify all WSL instances have stopped with ``wsl -l -v``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Verify all WSL instances have stopped with ``wsl -l -v``.
```

5. Start a WSL instance and perform the following steps as ``root``:

>    1. Verify the systemd subsystem is not registered with ``grep systemd /proc/self/cgroup``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   a. Verify the systemd subsystem is not registered with ``grep systemd /proc/self/cgroup``.
```

>    2. Run ``mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   b. Run ``mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd``.
```

>    3. Run ``mount cgroup -t cgroup /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd -o none,name=systemd,xattr``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   c.. Run ``mount cgroup -t cgroup /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd -o none,name=systemd,xattr``.
```

> 6. Start Docker Desktop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Start Docker Desktop.
```

.. note::

   The list of available systems is dependent on the ``ansible-test`` command you are using.

Python virtual environments
---------------------------

Python virtual environments provide a simple way to achieve isolation from the system and user Python environments.
They are recommended for unit and integration tests when the ``--docker`` and ``--remote`` options cannot be used.

The ``--venv`` option runs tests in a virtual environment managed by ``ansible-test``.
Requirements are automatically installed before tests are run.

Composite environment arguments
-------------------------------

The environment arguments covered in this document are sufficient for most use cases.
However, some scenarios may require the additional flexibility offered by composite environment arguments.

The ``--controller`` and ``--target`` options are alternatives to the ``--docker``, ``--remote`` and ``--venv`` options.

.. note::

   When using the ``shell`` command, the ``--target`` option is replaced by three platform specific options.

Add the ``--help`` option to your ``ansible-test`` command to learn more about the composite environment arguments.

> Requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional Requirements
```

> ============

Reviewer: ```suggestion
===================================
```

.. _testing_running_locally:

*******************************
Testing Ansible and Collections
*******************************

This document describes how to run tests using ``ansible-test``.

.. contents::
   :local:

Setup
=====

Before running ``ansible-test``, set up your environment for :ref:`Testing an Ansible Collection` or
:ref:`Testing ansible-core`, depending on which scenario applies to you.

.. warning::

   If you use ``git`` for version control, make sure the files you are working with are not ignored by ``git``.
   If they are, ``ansible-test`` will ignore them as well.

Testing an Ansible Collection
-----------------------------

If you are testing an Ansible Collection, you need a copy of the collection, preferably a git clone.
For example, to work with the ``community.windows`` collection, follow these steps:

1. Clone the collection you want to test into a valid collection root:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: `shell-session` is the same as `console` — it expects to highlight terminal capture, meaning both commands and their outputs. The commands are expected to begin with a $-prompt — this is how this lexer recognizes where it's fine to highlight shell syntax and where it's not (it doesn't attempt to highlight the output).
```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      git clone https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.windows ~/dev/ansible_collections/community/windows

   .. important::

      The path must end with ``/ansible_collections/{collection_namespace}/{collection_name}`` where
      ``{collection_namespace}`` is the namespace of the collection and ``{collection_name}`` is the collection name.

2. Clone any collections on which the collection depends:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      git clone https://github.com/ansible-collections/ansible.windows ~/dev/ansible_collections/ansible/windows

   .. important::

      If your collection has any dependencies on other collections, they must be in the same collection root, since
      ``ansible-test`` will not use your configured collection roots (or other Ansible configuration).

   .. note::

      See the collection's ``galaxy.yml`` for a list of possible dependencies.

3. Switch to the directory where the collection to test resides:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      cd ~/dev/ansible_collections/community/windows

Testing ``ansible-core``
------------------------

If you are testing ``ansible-core`` itself, you need a copy of the ``ansible-core`` source code, preferably a git clone.
Having an installed copy of ``ansible-core`` is not sufficient or required.
For example, to work with the ``ansible-core`` source cloned from GitHub, follow these steps:

1. Clone the ``ansible-core`` repository:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      git clone https://github.com/ansible/ansible ~/dev/ansible

2. Switch to the directory where the ``ansible-core`` source resides:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      cd ~/dev/ansible

3. Add ``ansible-core`` programs to your ``PATH``:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      source hacking/env-setup

   .. note::

      You can skip this step if you only need to run ``ansible-test``, and not other ``ansible-core`` programs.
      In that case, simply run ``bin/ansible-test`` from the root of the ``ansible-core`` source.

   .. caution::

      If you have an installed version of ``ansible-core`` and are trying to run ``ansible-test`` from your ``PATH``,
      make sure the program found by your shell is the one from the ``ansible-core`` source:

>       .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      .. code-block:: shell
```

Docker Desktop with WSL2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These instructions explain how to use ``ansible-test`` with WSL2 and Docker Desktop *without* ``systemd`` support.

.. note::

   If your WSL2 environment includes ``systemd`` support, these steps are not required.

Configuration requirements
""""""""""""""""""""""""""

1. Open Docker Desktop and go to the **Settings** screen.
2. On the the **General** tab:

   a. Uncheck the **Start Docker Desktop when you log in** checkbox.
   b. Check the **Use the WSL 2 based engine** checkbox.

3. On the **Resources** tab under the **WSL Integration** section:

   a. Enable distros you want to use under the **Enable integration with additional distros** section.

4. Click **Apply and restart** if changes were made.

Setup instructions
""""""""""""""""""

.. note::

   If all WSL instances have been stopped, these changes will need to be re-applied.

1. Verify Docker Desktop is properly configured (see :ref:`Configuration requirements`).
2. Quit Docker Desktop if it is running:

   a. Right click the **Docker Desktop** taskbar icon.
   b. Click the **Quit Docker Desktop** option.

3. Stop any running WSL instances with the command:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      wsl --shutdown

4. Verify all WSL instances have stopped with the command:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      wsl -l -v

5. Start a WSL instance and perform the following steps as ``root``:

   a. Verify the ``systemd`` subsystem is not registered:

      a.  Check for the ``systemd`` cgroup hierarchy with the following command:

>           .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          .. code-block:: shell
```

             grep systemd /proc/self/cgroup

      b. If any matches are found, re-check the :ref:`Configuration requirements` and follow the
         :ref:`Setup instructions` again.

   b. Mount the ``systemd`` cgroup hierarchy with the following commands:

>    .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: shell
```

      mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
      mount cgroup -t cgroup /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd -o none,name=systemd,xattr

6. Start Docker Desktop.

You should now be able to use ``ansible-test`` with the ``--docker`` option.

Linux cgroup configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

   These changes will need to be re-applied each time the container host is booted.

For certain container hosts and container combinations, additional setup on the container host may be required.
In these situations ``ansible-test`` will report an error and provide additional instructions to run as ``root``:

> .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell
```

   mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd
   mount cgroup -t cgroup /sys/fs/cgroup/systemd -o none,name=systemd,xattr

If you are using rootless Podman, an additional command must be run, also as ``root``.
Make sure to substitute your user and group for ``{user}`` and ``{group}`` respectively:

> .. code-block:: shell-session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell
```
